:title: Trigonometry
:date: 2014-08-25
:author: Joseph Thomas

Trigonometry is a fundamental topic in geometry, both mathematically
and historically. This film describes how trigonometry allows us to
calculate distances that would be impractical (or even impossible) to
measure by hand.

.. vimeo:: 113465084
   :width: 750
   :height: 500
   :align: center

Downloads 
=========
* `Trigonometry`_ (140 Mb): Here you can download a copy of the film
  to watch offline.
* `Teaching Materials <|filename|/downloads/trig_ws.pdf>`_ (PDF): Here
  you can download the worksheet that accompanies the materials. The
  download includes a key for the worksheet. A copy of the worksheet
  also appears below.

.. _Trigonometry: https://www.dropbox.com/s/8pi92on0dxj16wp/trigonometry_HD.avi?dl=0

Teaching Materials and Activities
=================================

Question 1
----------

The *Parallax Method* is a technique for estimating distances that has
applications in astronomy. The diagram below depicts our earth, the
sun, and a distant star $A$. Suppose you want to estimate the distance
between our Sun and the star $A$ marked in the picture.

.. image:: {filename}/images/parallax_diagram.png
    :alt: A schematic view of the earth, sun, and star.

**Part 1:** Using your everyday knowledge of the solar system, discuss
whether the diagram above is a scale model of the scenario we
described. (You don't need to write down any formulas here, just think
about how the distance from our earth to the sun compares with the
distance from our sun to other stars.)

**Part 2:** Say you use a telescope to measure that angle $\\alpha$ is
$0.7611$ arcseconds (there are 3600 arcsecond in one degree) and the
distance between earth and the sun is 1.000 astronomical unit
(AU). Use trigonometry to determine the distance from the sun to star
$A$ (in astronomical units). This is one of the main calculations
astronomers perform when they use the parallax method!


Question 2
----------

A *pocket transit* is a special type of compass that can be used for
measuring angles. 

.. image:: {filename}/images/transitParts.png
    :alt: Parts of a pocket transit

As you can see, this tool consists of a compass, a mirror, and a
*sight*. The sight allows you to align the compass with an object in
your field of vision. Here's one way to hold the pocket transit:

.. image:: {filename}/images/transit_usage.png

This is what you would see if you were holding the transit and looking
down at the compass:

.. image:: {filename}/images/transit_overhead.png

Do you see the reflection of the sight in the mirror? By looking into
the mirror, you can align the sight with an object (like a tree) while
keeping the compass horizontally level. Then, by looking at the
compass needle, you can measure the angle between that object and
magnetic north.

Suppose you're standing at point $A$ on a North-South road, and in the
distance you see a mountain.

.. figure:: {filename}/images/mountain_prob.png

Using your pocket transit, you measure that at point $A$, the angle
between point $C$ and due north is 67 degrees. Then, you drive in your
car 100 km north along the road to point $B$. At point $B$, your
pocket transit tells you the angle between point $C$ and due north is
90 degrees.

**Part 1:** Add the angles and lengths described in the story to the figure above.

**Part 2:** How far is point $B$ from point $C$? How far is point $A$ from point $C$?

Question 3
----------

In the first part of the twentieth century, sailors (and many other
people) used an instrument called a "Coincidence Rangefinder" to
determine the distance between their boat and another object, such as
another vessel or a light house. Here's one example of a coincidence
rangefinder:

.. figure:: {filename}/images/rangefinder2.jpg

Here is another larger version:

.. figure:: {filename}/images/rangefinder.jpg

The machine worked like this: The sailor would look through the
eyepieces and see two different images, one for each of the two lenses
on the machine. Here's an example of what a sailor might see before
adjusting the instrument:

.. figure:: {filename}/images/rfview.jpg

As you can see, the two images are slightly different!

By adjusting a knob, the sailor could move one of two images
horizontally (by rotating a prism) until the images aligned. By
examining how far the knob needed to be rotated, the sailor could
estimate the distance to the object in question.

Below is a schematic of the important parts of a coincidence
rangefinder that's being used to measure the distance to a tree:

.. figure:: {filename}/images/rangefinder_schematic.png
   :align: center

**Part 1:** Do you see any important right triangles in this diagram? Indicate them by tracing their shape on the worksheet.

**Part 2:** Rotating the knob on the rangefinder rotates one of the prisms in the machine, which adjusts the view in one of the eyepieces. Suppose you've adjusted the knob so the views through the eyepieces match. What angle have you measured, in effect, by adjusting the knob? Indicate the angle on the diagram.

**Part 3:** Let's say the main prisms on the rangefinder are one meter apart and the important angle you measured in part 2 is called $\\alpha$. Give a formula that would allow you to calculate the distance between the rangefinder and the tree, in terms of $\\alpha$.

